\chapter{E2E-VIV Explained\ifdraft{ (Philip/Daniel/Adam) (100\%)}{}}
\label{chapter:e2e_viv_explained}

\tododmwit{signposting; some content is here, but we need an intro and
transitions explaining what content is about to happen}

\section{Election Process and Goals}
A typical Internet voting election process has six phases:

\begin{description}
  \item[Setup] During the setup phase, election officials gather 
    information needed to run the election. This includes:
    \begin{itemize}
     \item gathering registration information for all voters;
     \item identifying the issues and races that will be voted on;
     \item designing ballots, often in multiple languages, for all
       precincts participating in the election;
     \item sending instructions and other information about the
       election to voters; and so on.
    \end{itemize}
  \item[Distribution] Different voting systems use different
    mechanisms to distribute ballots to voters, such as postal mail,
    email, or a website that provides downloadable ballots.
  \item[Voting] Voters fill out their ballots, often with the help of
    software installed on their own computers.
  \item[Casting] Election officials receive the completed ballots. As
    with distribution, different voting systems use different ballot
    casting mechanisms.
  \item[Tallying] The tallying phase includes the remainder of the
    tasks that finalize the election. Counting votes and announcing
    the election outcome are common to almost every election system,
    though some include other tasks such as publishing information
    needed for audits.
  \item[Auditing] Some elections will inevitably be disputed. In such
    cases, there is a final phase in which interested parties look for
    evidence that the election outcome is correct (or incorrect).
\end{description}

One major concern for Internet voting involves ballot integrity during the
distribution, voting, and casting phases. For the election outcome to be
correct, it is important that:
\begin{itemize}
\item the blank ballot that is received by and displayed to the voter
  match the ballot created and sent by the election officials;
\item the computer used to fill out the ballot faithfully reports the
  intention of the voter; and
\item the filled out ballot received by the election officials is the
  same as it was when the voter sent it.
\end{itemize}
Typical Internet communications involve not just the computers owned
by the two parties communicating, but also many intermediary computers
controlled by neither party. For example, an email you send from
anywhere in the world will travel through multiple servers on its way
to its destination. At any point, one of these servers could intercept
and modify the email without your knowledge. A good election system
needs to account for this, making it impossible for these
intermediaries to intercept ballots for viewing or modification during
transit.

Another concern is that most voters are not system administration
experts, and many of their computers are compromised by malware. A
compromised computer may corrupt the voting phase: even if the voter
receives an unaltered ballot, malware may change the way the ballot is
displayed or the way the vote is recorded before casting the
ballot. It can be difficult to design a system that can resist this
kind of attack without significantly reducing the usability of the
system. Some systems, referred to as dual (or triple) channel systems,
use alternative distribution mechanisms as cross-checks. For example,
election officials may send a code by postal mail that a voter can use
to check that a displayed ballot is correct.

As much as possible, Internet voting should be private and
anonymous. It is essential that voters are free to vote the way they
choose, and do not feel pressured to vote for a particular candidate
or vote a particular way on any issue. The fewer people who know or
can find out how a voter voted, the more comfortable the voter can
feel about privacy.

At the same time, election systems must only record votes from people
who are registered to vote, and must only record one vote from each
voter. Election systems must balance the need to keep votes anonymous
agsinst the need to ensure that a vote is coming from somebody who
should to be able to vote.
% I keep struggling with the fact that I think vote and ballot are two different things and that you are using them 
% interchangeably. A ballot can have many votes on it... I think people cast "ballots". 
% Is it "vote casting" or as I would say it ballot casting - they vote by casting a ballot,
% election officials record one ballot to a voter, but that ballot could contain
% many votes on it... isn't the ballot tied to the voter, and then the votes to the ballot,
% or maybe, I am using this language wrong - just thought I would note it. 
\tododmwit{ask Joe for a reference to the audit that showed that voting
terminal logs retained exactly who voted for what}

One popular approach to this problem in existing systems is to require
that each vote be tied to the voter who cast it long enough to decide
whether to include the vote in the later tally or not. After it is
decided to include the vote, the system records the vote and deletes
the information about who cast it. This approach can work; however,
audits of systems that take this approach have shown that it is easy
to accidentally retain the connection between votes and voters longer
than intended. This makes information much more widely visible than
intended. It would be better if voters could be confident that the
system does not store any connections between their votes and their
identities. To accomplish this, the information a voter returns during
the ballot casting phase must not include any personally identifying
material.

This is a subtle, but crucial, distinction. The overall objective is
for Internet voting systems to be correct, private, secure, and so
forth. It is important for the people who develop these systems to
verify that they are correct and take an active role in seeking out
and eliminating defects in the system. However, verifiable Internet
voting goes even farther: the system must be \emph{visibly}
correct. That is, voters using the system must be able to \emph{check}
that it is behaving correctly, without trusting that the system has no
bugs or trusting that the system's behavior has not been influenced by
third parties. It is especially difficult to prove to voters that
their personal information has been deleted in order to protect their
privacy, so voters may not want to provide their information in the
first place.

This is why it is critical that an Internet voting system not only be
correct, but \emph{verifiably} correct. Verifiability is one of the
central concerns of Internet voting, and is a critical part of the
defense against the software bugs, security vulnerabilities, and
sophisticated cybercrimes that history tells us are sure to occur.

The tallying process provides a particularly good example of the
difference between correctness and verifiability. Voters certainly
want the election system to count the votes correctly, but the goal of
verifiability is to provide some \emph{evidence} to voters that the
election outcome is correct. Different systems attempt this in
different ways. For example, they may allow voters to check that:

\begin{itemize}
\item their vote was included in the election outcome; 
\item the system is recording the content of their
votes correctly; or
\item the number of people that voted for a given candidate is
  accurately calculated (this must be proven without revealing any of
  the individual votes).
\end{itemize}

Meeting these verification objectives without violating anonymity and
privacy is a balancing act. Each of these individual objectives
contribute to a single top-level goal: \emph{end-to-end verifiability}.
``End-to-end'' means that the whole election process produces a result
that matches the intentions of the voters.

The verification objectives can be summarized with the catchphrase,
``Cast as intended; recorded as cast; and counted as recorded.''

\begin{itemize}
\item ``Cast as intended'' is the demand that casting use secure
  communications and other mechanisms to ensure that malware and
  outsiders cannot change the vote.
\item``Recorded as cast'' is the demand that the election system
  itself correctly interprets a vote.
\item ``Counted as recorded'' is the demand that the tallying process
  be accurate.
\end{itemize}

These demands are subject not only to correctness but also to
verifiability, so that voters can believe these properties hold even
if they suspect that the systems, or the election officials, are
corrupt.

\section{Shortcomings and Expectations of E2E-VIV}

As discussed in \autoref{chapter:remote_voting}, several difficulties
exist with current voting processes:

\begin{itemize}
\item voters with disabilities cannot vote unassisted; 
\item communication channels with remote voters are often slow and
  unreliable;
\item vote tallying is labor-intensive and error-prone; 
\item election audits are costly; and
\item there is little visibility into the election process, so voters
  (and, in some cases, even auditors) must trust the reports of
  election officials and voting hardware vendors on election outcomes
  and processes.
\end{itemize}

Internet voting may be able to alleviate some of these
concerns. Voters with disabilities could potentially use their own
familiar hardware, such as Braille displays, screen readers,
sip-and-puff input devices, and others, to participate in the
election. Internet communications are traditionally speedy (taking
seconds rather than weeks) and relatively robust compared to overseas
postal mail. In most systems, tallying is automated and fast. Auditing
can still be a challenge, though it is expected that verifiable
systems can make elections more transparent for this purpose. However,
implementation of Internet voting has its own challenges. A system
that properly addresses privacy and security concerns may be too
complex to use and maintain or too costly to deploy.\todo{I think I
  managed to get the best of both the original and Susan/LIsa's
  version into here, but it may be missing something or not say quite
  what we want. Somebody else should check it. -dmz}

\section{E2E-VIV in Practice}

A number of practical voting systems have been developed based on the
principles of E2E-VIV. This section describes several systems that
communities have used in real elections or pilot tests.

\subsection{RIES}
\label{sec:ries} 

RIES, the Rijnland Internet Election System~\cite{hubbers2004}, was
first used in 2004 to support elections to the Rijnland water
management board. RIES supplemented the system of postal voting
already in use. Election officials used a later version of RIES to
allow expatriate voters to participate in the Dutch parliamentary
elections~\cite{gonggrijp2009}.

Before a RIES election, credentials---in the form of a very long
number---and instructions are sent by postal mail to every voter.

During the election, each voter logs into the election website. The
website includes a voting application written in JavaScript; the
voting application is a ``client-side'' application, which means that
it runs on the voter's computer and not on the election server. The
client-side application processes the voter's authorization code and
the public identification of the candidate to create an encrypted
vote. The encrypted vote is then placed on a public online ``bulletin
board'' that serves as a ballot box.

At the close of the polls, the election authority releases the final
vote tallies along with a codebook containing the encryptions of all
valid credentials and all candidate identifications.

The algorithms and protocols used by RIES are public, and each voter
has access to all of the inputs and outputs. In principle, each voter
may check the computations. This level of verifiability is weaker than
the desired individual verifiability of E2E-VIV, but is nonetheless
far stronger than conventional voting systems.

In 2006, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE) sent an election assessment team to observe the use of
RIES. Their report~\cite{osce2007} stated that they could not observe
many critical security features of the system, and therefore could not
be certain of their effectiveness. In 2008, the Eindhoven Institute
for the Protection of Systems and Information (EiPSI) revealed several
weaknesses in RIES~\cite{hubbers2008}:

\begin{itemize}
  \item the voter self-check procedure is quite complicated;
  \item the two-channel (mail and Internet) voting makes the system
    less transparent;
  \item too much power is given to the election administrator and the
    system's Internet host;
  \item issues arise when modifying the codebook due to a revoked
    ballot; and
  \item realistic ways to forge votes via cryptographic means (in
    particular, using hash collisions) exist.
\end{itemize}

One of the more important lessons learned through RIES is that when
voter authorizations are distributed far in advance of the election, a
mechanism must be provided that allows voters to obtain replacement
credentials and invalidate lost credentials. This mechanism adds
significant complexity to the system, and is a source of some of the
problems reported in the OSCE and EiPSI reports.

Another feature of RIES, which has significant tradeoffs, is the
ability to perform testing during the election: pre-invalidated test
ballots are deliberately added to the bulletin board in order to test
the network path from selected Internet clients to the server. While
such testing can, in principle, increase confidence in the election
integrity, in practice it opens the system to spoofing and denial of
service\footnote{A \emph{spoofing} attack deceives the target into
  believing that an Internet communication came from somewhere other
  than its actual source. A \emph{denial of service} (DoS) attack is
  an attempt to make an Internet server unavailable to its intended
  users.} attacks. Moreover, the RIES implementation is aware when it
is processing test ballots rather than real ballots, and all of the
test ballots are typically voted identically from the same
computer. This significantly limits the confidence provided by such
testing, at the expense of increased system vulnerability.

Because of these critical reports, election officials discontinued
plans to use RIES in the 2008 Dutch parliamentary elections, and the
Netherlands banned Internet voting.

\subsection{Prêt à Voter}
\label{sec:pret-voter}

In 2007, the University of Surrey in Victoria, Australia attempted to
use the Prêt à Voter system~\cite{chaum2005, burton2012} in a student
election~\cite{bismark2007}. The failure of this attempt illustrated
many of the pitfalls of adapting a research system to an actual
election, such as a short timetable, a lack of clear requirements, and
the need for rigorous implementation practices.

Prêt à Voter uses two-part paper ballots. Candidate names appear on
one part and voting targets---the areas that voters must mark to cast
their votes---appear with a ballot ID number or barcode on the other
part. Typically, the two parts are printed as a single sheet with a
perforation to divide the sheet after voting.

From the voter's perspective, the order of the candidate names on the
ballot is random. The voter makes a mark next to the candidate name
she chooses, separates the two parts of the ballot, and destroys the
part containing the candidate names. She may take a copy of the voted
part home for later verification.

For tabulation, a cryptographically secure mapping exists from the
ballot ID numbers to the apparently-random orderings of the
candidates. The system uses this mapping to decode the cast ballots
into readable ballots with candidate names, while removing the
associations between ballots and their ID numbers. The decoded ballots
are then posted to a public bulletin board.

Unvoted ballots may be audited before, during and after the election
to ensure that the decoding of cast ballots is being correctly
performed. Randomly selected stages in the decoding can be challenged
to prove the integrity of the count, and any interested party can
easily count the decoded ballots for verification.

Individuals may also search for their voted ballot IDs on the public
bulletin board. This reveals the positions that were marked on that
ballot but, crucially, does not show the corresponding candidate
names. A voter can verify that the positions she marked at the polling
place were correctly recorded by the system, but because she no longer
has the part of the ballot linking candidate names to ballot
positions, she cannot prove to anyone else how she voted.

\todo{Need some text about why the attempt failed!}

\subsection{Punchscan}
\label{sec:punchscan}

Punchscan~\cite{popoveniuc2006,popoveniuc2010punchscan} was used for
the graduate student association elections of the University of Ottawa
in 2007~\cite{essex2007}. It is likely the first E2E voting system
with ballot privacy used in a binding election.

The election experience for a Punchscan voter is very similar to that
of Prêt à Voter. Punchscan also uses a two-part paper ballot, but the
two parts are overlaid one atop the other. The top part has candidate
names and candidate numbers (or letters), and the bottom part has
numbered (or lettered) voting targets; both parts have an identical
serial number. The voting targets on the bottom part are visible
through holes punched in the top part. The order of the voting targets
for each race appears random to the voter.

The voter casts a vote by marking a choice with a bingo dauber---a
thick marker used to fill in circles on bingo cards--- and the two
halves are separated. Either side can be cast as a ballot, since the
bingo dauber marks both: one through the hole and the other around
it. The uncast side is destroyed, and the voter may retain a copy of
the cast side.

Anybody may inspect the public record of any cast ballot, exactly as
with Prêt à Voter; this allows voters to verify that their receipts
match the public record. It does not matter which half of the ballot a
voter retains, since neither half by itself contains the necessary
information to determine the vote. Like Prêt à Voter, Punchscan uses a
cryptographically secure mapping from the ballot serial numbers to the
apparently-random orderings of the candidate voting positions to
decode the ballots for counting. Individual ballots may be audited to
ensure that the decoding process is carried out correctly.

\subsection{Scantegrity II}
\label{sec:scantegrity-ii}

Scantegrity II (Invisible Ink)~\cite{chaum2008,chaum2009} was used in
the Takoma Park, Maryland municipal elections in
2009~\cite{carback2010}. It was also used in 2011 for in-person
voting, along with Remotegrity (\autoref{sec:remotegrity}) for
absentee voting. The 2009 Takoma Park election was the first use of an
E2E-V system with ballot privacy in binding governmental elections.

Before the election, officials generate a random seed\footnote{A
  \emph{random seed} is used by software that generates sequences of
  pseudorandom numbers. Every time the software is started with the
  same seed, it generates the same sequence of numbers.\todo{This
    explanation may need to be better/more complete/perhaps integrated
    into the text}} using a ``secret sharing'' scheme; each official
inputs a piece of secret information (such as a password) into the
system, and the system combines these pieces into a single result. The
system then generates three-letter alphanumeric codes are created for
each choice on each printed ballot using this seed. It also creates
additional tables so that interested parties can later confirm that
the system computed the tally correctly.

During the election, the voter experience is nearly identical to that
of conventional optical-scan paper ballots. When a voter marks a
choice, the ink in the pen reacts with invisible ink on the paper to
disclose the three-letter code in the marked voting target. The ballot
identification number and the displayed code are posted to a public
online bulletin board.

After the election, public verification of the final tally proceeds
with the public bulletin board in a manner similar to that of
Punchscan and Prêt à Voter.

In addition to the public verification, individual voters can record
their ballot ID numbers and the codes revealed from the invisible
ink. They can then use the public bulletin board to check that their
ballots were tabulated. This information, however, is not sufficient
to prove that they voted a particular way.

\subsection{Remotegrity}
\label{sec:remotegrity}
Remotegrity~\cite{zagorski2013} is a remote coded voting system that
was used for absentee voting alongside Scantegrity
(\autoref{sec:scantegrity-ii}) for in-person voting for the 2011
Takoma Park, Maryland municipal elections.

Remotegrity voters receive a coded voting ballot and an authentication
card in the mail. The codes on the ballot can be covered by a
lottery-style scratch-off field. The authentication card contains
several authentication codes under scratch-off, a lock-in code under
scratch-off, and an acknowledgment code. Both cards have serial
numbers. The voter can be sent two ballots so that she can use one for
auditing purposes.

To vote, the voter enters both serial numbers, the codes corresponding
to her choices, and an authentication code obtained after
scratching-off a surface chosen at random.

She returns to the election website a few hours later to check if her
codes are correctly represented, and to see if the election authority
has posted her acknowledgment code next to the codes. This indicates
to her that the election officials received valid codes for her
ballot.

She scratches off the lock-in code and posts it on the website. This
affirms to the election officials, observers and other voters that her
vote is correctly represented on the website.

Among all of the systems discussed here, this is the first one that
asks the voter to take positive action to confirm that the vote was
correctly posted.

As with RIES, if we assume that there is no communication between the
computer used to print the credentials and the computer used to
collect the votes, the latter computer does not know the mapping
from codes to candidates, so the vote is not revealed to the
computer. Further, because the computer does not know a valid code
corresponding to another candidate on the ballot, it cannot change the
vote. Finally, and uniquely, because the computer does not know the
acknowledgment code, its presence on the election website assures the
voter that the election officials received a valid code for her
ballot.

The tally is computed from the codes in a verifiable manner that
corresponds to the coded voting system used.

If a jurisdiction is nervous about using the Internet for remote
voting, Remotegrity ballots can be mailed in, and voters can check for
their codes on the election website to be assured that their vote
correctly reached election officials.

\subsection{Helios}

Helios~\cite{adida2008,adida2009} is a system developed for web-based
Internet voting. It was used for the election of a Belgian university
president in March 2009 and by numerous universities and associations
since then, including the Association for Computing Machinery and the
International Association for Cryptologic Research.

Before a Helios election, officials input the email addresses of the
voters who will be participating. The system emails the voters their
randomly-generated login information and the link to the election
website.

During the election, the voter enters their choices on the
website. After entering her choices, the voter has an option to spoil
their ballot in order to verify that it was recorded correctly. Upon
completing a non-spoiled ballot, the system sends an email confirming
the receipt of their vote, though not their choices. At any time
before the close of the election, the voter can repeat these steps and
the new vote will replace the old vote.

After the election, Helios uses homomorphic vote tallying with the
optional addition of mixers and mixnets in some
derivatives~\cite{bulens2011,tsoukalas2013}.

Voter authentication is not required until after the voter decides to
cast the ballot, so any interested party may prepare and audit
ballots. All cast ballots are posted in encrypted form on a public
bulletin board so that voters may check that their ballots have been
correctly recorded. Similarly, after the polls close, the decryption
and vote tally may be checked.

\subsection{Norwegian System}

Between 2011 and 2014, the Norwegian government ran an Internet remote
voting trial~\cite{gjosteen2012} using a cryptographic protocol
designed by Scytl, a commercial voting system vendor. 
% If the claim is
% accurate, this is among the first efforts by commercial voting system vendors to
% enable E2E elections. (Note that Remotegrity has also been commercialized and it was used in 2011). 

The Norwegian system uses a three-channel model involving postal mail,
the Internet, and SMS text messaging. Before the election, the voter
receives authorization codes to cast a ballot via postal mail.

During the election, the voter uses a computer to cast an encrypted
ballot. The voter can cast multiple ballots; only the last ballot cast
is counted, and if a voter votes both on paper at a polling place and
by Internet, the paper ballot overrides the Internet ballot. After
casting a ballot, the voter receives a confirmation code offering a
partial end-to-end proof via an SMS message.

Available descriptions of the Norwegian system are incomplete, so it
is not possible to analyze the system in depth. However the system's
claims to protect voter privacy are weak: ``If the voter's computer
and the return code generator are both honest, the content of the
voter's ballot remains private.'' In addition, the receipt delivered
to the voter proves only that the encrypted ballot was received as
cast, not that it was counted as cast or that the encrypted vote
matches the voter's intent.

The system evolved significantly between its first use in 2011 and
2013, with added complexity to attempt to assure voters that their
ballots were stored as cast. In 2013, the Carter Center mounted a
serious effort to observe the Norwegian system in action. Their
report on the operation of the system and the problems
they had observing it offers useful insight into the administration of
E2E systems in general as well as the particulars of the Norwegian
system~\cite{carter2013}.

Scytl and the
Norwegian government assert that this is an E2E system. However, the paper says that, if the voter's encryption software colludes with the return code generator (both presumably run on software written by Scytl), it can lead the voter into believing her vote was cast accurately even when it is not. Thus its property of voter-verifiability relies on voting system software behaving honestly. Additionally, the system does not provide a proof of the tally and hence the tally is not universally verifiable. Finally, there is no information that enables a voter to know which of her votes was counted (if she casts multiple vote to ward off coercion). Because the correctness of the tally is not possible without the correct votes being included in the count, the voting public also does not have the information to determine that only one vote was counted for each voter. For all these reasons, Scytl as used in the Norwegian elections is not considered an E2E system. 

\subsection{Wombat}

The Wombat voting system~\cite{rosen2011} has been used for multiple
pilot elections in Israel. It is an in-person voting system where the
voter votes on a touch-screen and obtains a printout of her vote with
an encryption of it. The voter can choose to cast or audit the
encrypted vote. If she chooses to audit the vote, she may check if the
vote was correctly encrypted. If she chooses to cast it, the
ciphertext is posted online, and she casts the unencrypted vote in the
ballot box (this may be manually counted) and takes the ciphertext
home. The votes are tallied using a verifiable mixnet.

\subsection{DEMOS}

DEMOS~\cite{kiayias2014} is a coded vote system where the voter is
given a two-part coded ballot; she audits one part and uses the other
to vote. Associated with each choice on the ballot is a vote
code---the encryption of the vote, which is entered in the voting
machine by the voter, and a receipt code which the voter does not
enter, but which is posted online next to the vote code.

The voter can check the receipt to ensure her vote reached the
election authorities. The ballot also has a QR code containing all the
information on the ballot which can be scanned by the voter if she
prefers not to manually enter the vote code. Once the ballot is
entirely represented on the computer, the voter can then make her
choices. Note that if the voter scans the QR code, the scanning
computer knows how she voted. The vote codes represent homomorphic
encryptions of the votes and the verifiable tally is obtained in a
standard manner.

A pilot study of DEMOS was carried out during the 2014 European
Elections in Greece.

\section{Limitations of Existing Systems}
\label{sec:limit-exist-syst}

E2E systems inherit many of the limitations of traditional voting
systems. Reliability of equipment, reliance on procedure, trust in
insiders, and accessibility are all problems with traditional
in-person voting systems. For remote systems, the integrity of postal
systems, turnaround time for mailed materials, access to Internet or
fax technology, and reliability of Internet servers are all
well-documented obstacles to voting. \todoacf{reference other sections
  about this}

Existing E2E systems mitigate some of these limitations. For example,
code voting limits the ability for attacks against postal mail systems
to change the candidates marked on voted ballots. However if an
attacker simply intercepts and destroys the voted ballot, a
replacement might not arrive in time for that voter to participate in
the election. To mitigate this, election officials might choose to
instead accept voted ballots via fax, email, or website, but such
expedient measures often trade off the verifiability that makes an E2E
system desirable in the first place.

In this section, we examine the limitations of E2E systems with a
particular focus on the limitations that are unique to or exacerbated
by E2E characteristics.

\subsection{Voter Secrecy}

Systems like Prêt à Voter (\autoref{sec:pret-voter}) and Punchscan
(\autoref{sec:punchscan}) rely on a randomized candidate order or a code
on printed ballots to ensure voter secrecy. Voted ballots must appear
on a public bulletin board in order to verify the election results,
and so to protect secrecy only the selected position or code is
visible on the final ballot along with a ballot ID.

If an insider is able to review the printed ballots before the
election, they can record how the candidate positions are arranged for
each ballot ID and therefore identify which candidate is marked on the
voted ballots, thus violating secrecy~\cite{burton2012}.

Recent writing on Prêt à Voter recommends printing ballots on demand
at polling places in order to limit this
possibility~\cite{ryan2009}. Printing on demand introduces additional
problems and expense compared to centralized printing. More printing
equipment is required at each polling place, that equipment can break
or be difficult to operate, and the printing equipment must have some
way of communicating with the rest of the election infrastructure to
ensure it has, for example, the correct cryptographic seeds for
generating new ballots.

Scantegrity II (\autoref{sec:scantegrity-ii}) uses invisible ink to hide
the vote codes on unvoted ballots, and Remotegrity
(\autoref{sec:remotegrity}) can use scratch-off fields to hide vote codes
and other information required to cast a ballot. These techniques
limit the opportunity for insiders to learn secrecy-compromising
information without being detected through the presence of a marked or
damaged ballot.

Even with techniques to mitigate insider foreknowledge of the ballots,
secrecy still can depend on voters and poll workers correctly
following procedures. A voter can leave the polling place with a
complete Prêt à Voter ballot, for example, failing to shred the half
with the candidate order. With both halves of their ballot, they can
prove how they voted, losing receipt-freedom.

RIES (\autoref{sec:ries}) makes a deliberate secrecy tradeoff by
weakening the receipt-freeness requirement in exchange for providing
universal verifiability and a degree of individual verifiability. The
results of an entire election can be independently audited with only
the information publicly available after the election. However if a
voter discloses her credential or her encrypted vote, the same public
information may be used to violate ballot secrecy. The developers of
RIES judged this violation to be no more severe than the threats to
ballot secrecy inherent in postal voting, and therefore worth
accepting for the benefit to verifiability.

\subsection{Ballot Stuffing}

As when ensuring voter secrecy, many E2E systems depend on correct
procedures to defend against ballot stuffing. For example, during the
University of Ottawa elections using Punchscan, more ballots were cast
than voters recorded in the pollbook. In this case, ballot stuffing
can be caught after the fact by poll workers, but is not an inherently
verifiable property of the system, and requires trust in the accuracy
of the poll workers.

In the Helios system, officials can enter voters by email address, and
so there is limited protection against insider ballot stuffing. Helios
relies on individual voters verifying their votes. While an interested party may verify the tally for the entire election by checking that the collection of encrypted votes is counted correctly,
there is no provision for the interested party to determine if votes were fraudulently cast on behalf of voters who had not voted~\cite{orion2009}.

A pre-election step that publicly publishes tables of valid ballot IDs
can help mitigate this problem, but also creates others. All votes in
the final tally have an (anonymized) provenance that can be traced
back to before the election began and presumably cross-checked with
voter registration rolls. However having a fixed set of ballot IDs can
make it harder to replace lost, stolen, or spoiled ballots, or to
providing for late or same-day voter registration.

\subsection{Dispute Resolution}

Note that E2E systems provide voter verifiability: they enable a voter to determine if her vote was accurately recorded. However, in the instance when the vote is not accurately recorded, not all E2E systems provide the voter with evidence that she may use to convince an independent party of the problem. This presents a loophole that may be exploited by dishonest voters, who may claim that their vote is not accurately recorded when it is, calling into question an honest election. 

An E2E system with the dispute resolution property enables a voter to present evidence to support claims of election fraud. As a result, it enables a third party to resolve a dispute between a voter (claiming her vote is inaccurately recorded) and the voting system (claiming it is accurate). 

All cryptographic protocols in the literature that provide dispute resolution require either paper or a second channel (such as a smartphone) in addition to the machine the voter votes from, whether in a polling booth or remotely. (We consider only protocols intended for use by voters voting from machines that are not trusted). 

This implies that any existing voting system with dispute resolution needs the use of a second electronic channel or paper.  

\subsection{Infrastructure \& Equipment}

Election equipment fails in practice. An E2E system must be resilient
to failures while not giving up E2E properties. A system that lacks
robust fallback mechanisms is not itself robust, but is only as strong
as its weakest fallback. For example, if a remote voting website fails
and election officials resort to accepting voted ballots by email, E2E
guarantees are lost for all of the emailed ballots.

In addition to being more sensitive to failures, verifiable election
systems often require more sophisticated equipment than traditional
systems. For in-person voting, a verifiable system might require
ballots to be printed on demand, a high-quality shredder for two-part
ballots, and more sophisticated assistive devices. This complexity
incurs additional cost and poll worker training requirements.

Many E2E systems post encrypted ballots during an election to a public
bulletin board. In order to update the bulletin board in real time,
these election systems are distributed systems, networked via
traditional means or via a manual air gap. Depending on the networking
scheme this can open equipment to distributed denial of service (DDoS)
attacks, network partitions, inconsistency, and other problems
inherent to distributed systems.

Internet systems compound the difficulties of distributed systems by
requiring the systems to be accessible via the public Internet,
increasing the possibilities for DDoS and other malicious
attacks. Furthermore, many systems allow voters to use their own
computers to vote, leading to pitfalls inherent when election
officials lack control over the voting environment. Malware on the
voter's computer might undermine security, incompatibilites might
arise due to operating systems or web browser versions, and the
network infrastructure between the voter and the central election
system might be compromised with a man-in-the-middle attack.

\subsection{Usability}

Traditional election systems struggle with usability. Most often, however, the problems can be addressed with special attention to user interface design. Verifiable
systems add more steps and complexity, presenting usability complications that have not been fully studied. The mechanics of marking a ballot become more complex with
code voting as in Remotegrity, and position or shape matching as in
Prêt à Voter and Punchscan. Individual verification, not even possible
in traditional systems, is an entirely new process that voters must
master to take full advantage of E2E guarantees. Many E2E systems have attempted to reduce the additional effort for voters who are not interested in participating in election verifiability. 

In 2014, a team of researchers from Rice University undertook a
quantitative, experimental study of the usability of Helios, Prêt à
Voter, and Scantegrity II~\cite{acemyan2014usability}. They aimed to
quantify usability using the ISO 9241-11 standard axes of
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction. Their results show that
these systems broadly fail on these axes even for typical voters who
are uninterested in performing additional verification steps.

The Rice study found the systems were not effective as significant
number of voters failed to cast a ballot with each
system. Troublingly, many of those voters thought they had in fact
successfully cast a ballot; in a real election they would have left
the voting process unfinished without even knowing to ask a poll
worker for assistance. By contrast, traditional systems have
near-100\% success rates~\cite{byrne2007usability}.

The systems also lacked efficiency, as they all required significantly
more time -- almost twice as long -- to complete as a traditional
system.

The usability of an election system is crucial for that system to not
disenfranchise voters, and for voters to generally have confidence in
the election results. The Rice study shows that adding E2E guarantees
can be a Pyhrric victory when the resulting system is unusable for
non-expert voters.

The results of the Rice study have been challenged by McBurnett et al~\cite{mcburnett2014}. 
\subsection{Accessibility}

There are ability requirements for many E2E systems in various stages
of the voting process. For example, a sighted voter is able to see the
correspondence between candidate position and marking position on a
Punchscan ballot, but a non-sighted voter cannot without
assistance. In addition to obstacles to marking a ballot, some schemes with
individual verification lack provisions for disabled voters to
participate in individual verification without assistance. Information
required for verification is frequently delivered through a paper
receipt, an invisible ink code, or requires writing down receipt
data.

Accessible verification protocols have been proposed that take care to
protect voter secrecy and allow participation in individual
verification~\cite{chaum2009accessible}. However, these protocols
require using accessibility equipment with an audio, sip-puff, or
switch interface to read and mark the unencrypted ballot. The device
must therefore be trusted not to record the votes, which would violate
voter secrecy. The device must also represent the ballot faithfully to
the voter so that votes are recorded as intended.

Requiring trust in assistive devices is not unique to E2E
systems~\cite{runyan2007improving}. In non-E2E systems, though, voters are required to trust many aspects of the election. In the context of having to trust the
chain of custody of ballots, the integrity of poll workers, and the
outcomes of any audits, having to trust an assistive device is a
relatively small concession to make in an already-flawed system.

On the other hand, a well-designed E2E system requires a much smaller
base of trust for voters to have confidence in the results of an
election. The additional requirement of trusting an assistive device is not a flaw of the E2E system, but, instead, a limitation inherent to the use of assistive devices. It may be mitigated by enabling the voter with the need for assistance to use multiple assistive devices, and by requiring that all voters, whether in need of assistance or not, use similar assistive devices or a universal interface. This ensures that the assistive device and/or interface is tested by multiple users. 
% By requiring an expanded base of trust in order to be
% accessible, the existing E2E systems undermine their E2E properties.

\subsection{Social \& Political}

Novel election systems face a difficult bootstrapping problem: in
order to be adopted in large-scale elections, they must have a
successful track record. However in order to build up that track
record, systems must be successful despite the limited resources
available during small-scale pilot programs. With limited resources,
corners are cut in the implementation of the election system leading
to a greater chance that problems with equipment, software, and
support will undermine confidence in the system.

This confidence in election systems generally, and E2E systems in
particular, is fragile in the eyes of the public. When election
systems fail during an election or are revealed to have substantial
integrity issues, the perception of all similar systems is tainted, no
matter the differences between specific systems or the reassurance of
E2E guarantees. Failure of a legacy computerized system can poison the
well and make the public reject a novel system by association.

For example, The Federal Constitutional Court of Germany issued a
decision in 2009 in the wake of a hacking demonstration on electronic
voting machines used in previous elections~\cite{germany2009decision}.
They decided that electronic systems may only be used in elections if
``the result can be examined reliably and without any specialist
knowledge of the subject'', a standard which E2E systems have not been
able to meet in practice~\cite{byrne2007usability}. Similarly after
reports critical of RIES, a popular movement successfully advocated
for a ban on Internet voting in the Netherlands.

Broader computer security concerns are becoming topics of household
conversation with vulnerabilities like Heartbleed and droves of
personal data compromises making the headlines. These concerns rightly
make the public wary of any system with a computerized component, even
if the Internet is not involved. The challenge for E2E systems is to
overcome this broader skepticism by demonstrating integrity in a way
accessible to non-experts without making it more difficult to vote.

%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: "report"
%%% End:
